http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~doug/biography
3
M. Douglas McIlroy
doug@cs.dartmouth.edu

An Adjunct Professor of Computer Science at Dartmouth,
M. Douglas McIlroy retired in 1997 from the Computing
Sciences Research Center at Bell Laboratories (formerly a
part of AT&T, now Alcatel-Lucent).  At Bell Labs he headed the
Computing Techniques Research Department from 1965 to 1986, and
thereafter served as Distinguished Member of Technical Staff.
Best known as the birthplace of the Unix operating system,
the Computing Techniques Research Department did wide-ranging
theoretical and applied research in programming languages,
compilers, operating systems, design verification, algorithms,
computational complexity, text processing, graphics, image
processing, and computer security.

In the area of computer languages, McIlroy participated
in the design of PL/I (a general-purpose language of the
1960's), contributed to C++, and wrote unusual compilers
for PL/I, Lisp, Altran (an algebraic manipulation system),
and TMG (a compiler-writing tool).  Long interested in
data-stream processing, he conceived "pipes" for combining
Unix programs, invented the classic coroutine prime-number
sieve, and developed algorithms for processing power series.
Other research topics include text and string processing,
computer cartography, theorem proving, and dynamic storage
allocation.  The notion of "language extension" arose from his
early work in macroprocessors, and "software components" from
a 1968 NATO paper.  In a lighter vein, he coauthored Darwin,
the first game of survival among self-reproducing programs,
and used the computer for word games.  His more recent research
addressed multilevel security for Unix, ultimately accurate
bitmap graphics, and full-text indexing.

He contributed to the design and construction of the Multics
operating system.  To Unix he contributed many utilities and
subroutines, ranging from the lowly "echo", through "diff"
for file comparison, "spell" for checking spelling, and "join"
for database manipulation, to "speak", the first real-time
text-to-speech program.

McIlroy joined Bell Laboratories in 1958 after earning a
bachelor's degree in engineering physics from Cornell University
and a PhD in applied mathematics from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.  He taught while at MIT, and was a
visiting lecturer at Oxford University from 1967 to 1968.

He served the Association for Computing Machinery as national
lecturer, Turing award chairman, member of the publications
planning committee, and associate editor for the Communications
of the ACM, the Journal of the ACM, and ACM Transactions on
Programming Languages and Systems.  He also served on the
executive committee of CSNET (an evolutionary stage between
the exclusive ARPANET and the public Internet), on various
advisory panels to the Department Defense, the New Jersey
Board of Higher Education, and the National Science Foundation,
and on visiting committees at Argonne National Laboratories,
Syracuse University, and the University of Texas at Austin.
He coauthored several National Research Council reports,
including "Computers at Risk" (computer security, 1990) and
"Computing the Future" (directions for academic computer
science, 1992).  He is a past officer of the New York Map
Society, a founding member of the International Federation of
Information Processing Societies working group on programming
methodology (WG2.3), and a fellow of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science.

In 2004 the Usenix Association presented McIlroy its lifetime
achievement award "for over fifty years of elegant contributions
to Unix and programming", and also its Software Tools User
Group award.  In 2006 he was elected to the National Academy
of Engineering.

In his previous home town of Bernardsville, New Jersey, McIlroy
served as chairman of the shade tree commission, chairman of
the environmental commission, alternate member of the planning
board, and trustee of the public library.  He now lives in
Hanover, New Hampshire, where he serves on the conservation
commission, chairs the town trails committee, and is the oldest
active participant in the Skating Club at Dartmouth.

updated 03/14/07
